[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>LISA GARR: Hello, and welcome.
Hi, I'm Lisa Garr.
In today's world, there are
so many different opinions
of what the perfect
diet should be.
According to the
Vegetarian Journal,
more and more people are moving
towards the raw food diet.
The American Cancer Society
says that more than half
of your daily intake
of food should
be fruits and vegetables.
So no matter what
your choice is,
we're going to make it easy for
you today, and very convenient,
for you to have the health the
benefits of a green food diet.
And joining me is
Victoria Boutenko.
She is a raw foodist.
And she's a pioneer in the
green smoothie revolution.
She has the award-winning
book called "Green for Life,"
and she's all about making green
foods practical, fun, and easy
for us to be able to consume.
Thank you so much
for joining me.
>>VICTORIA BOUTENKO: Thank
you for having me, Lisa.
>>LISA: Absolutely.
You have so much knowledge.
You tell such amazing
stories around food.
So I really appreciate what
you bring to this conversation.
So take us back to
when your family wasn't
eating the raw food.
You're also known as The
Raw Food Family, which
I think is great,
Raw Family is great.
But what happened before that?
Why did you decide to take your
family in the raw direction?
>>BOUTENKO: It
happened that as soon
as we immigrated to
the United States
25 years ago, within
a year we started
to become very, very sick.
And we came from Russia.
At the time, the Soviet
Union was very hungry.
We were deprived of
some basic nutrients.
And so we were really
going for food here.
And I was sure
that American food
is the healthiest in the world,
because it's the wealthiest
country.
And so food was supposed
to be the most nutritious.
And I didn't cut
myself on anything.
I just was eating everything
that was promoted.
>>LISA: About how
long ago was this?
>>BOUTENKO: It was 25 years ago.
>>LISA: 25 years ago.
OK.
>>BOUTENKO: And so
we became so ill,
by 1994, 1993, we
became so sick.
I developed arrhythmia
and gained lots of weight.
And arrhythmia took
my father's life.
So I started to be
worried about that.
My husband developed rheumatoid
arthritis and hyperthyroidism.
And my daughter, she was born
with asthmatic component,
and she developed asthma.
She was now sneezing and
coughing every night.
And my son was diagnosed with
diabetes at the age of 9.
And my grandmother died
from overdose of insulin,
so I was afraid of
insulin more than disease.
>>LISA: You had a
very sick family.
>>BOUTENKO: Very sick family.
And my oldest son was
living separately,
so he didn't participate
in that experiment.
So I was searching
and searching.
And at that time we
lived in Colorado.
I was searching,
and one day I met
the woman who was in raw food.
And I think maybe she was
the only one in Colorado
at that time eating raw food.
And she told me
that our illnesses
could be cured by raw foods.
And at first I was
very disappointed,
because I love to eat.
But then she gave me the
book, she explained to me.
She said birds don't cook
and snakes don't cook
and tigers don't cook.
It's only humans.
And then she said
we're supposed to eat
fresh fruits, vegetables,
nuts, and seeds.
And she gave me the book.
And then she said,
sorry, I have to go.
>>LISA: This was
just a brief meeting.
>>BOUTENKO: I met her
in a line in the bank.
>>LISA: Oh.
So did you just go
up to her and say,
you look great-- what do you do?
>>BOUTENKO: For two months,
I've been stopping people
on the street who looked
healthier than others
and asked them how they
achieved their health.
And when I asked her, she
said anything could be cured.
And I said, even diabetes?
She said even diabetes.
And she said, I cured my
colon cancer 15 years ago.
>>LISA: Oh my goodness.
>>BOUTENKO: From Stage 3.
>>LISA: So the doctors
that you were going to,
the professionals that were
telling you how to get well
wasn't something you
wanted to follow.
>>BOUTENKO: Professionals
never told me I will get well.
They told me that I could
control my symptoms.
And because I have
very good education,
I actually went to
the medical library,
and I subscribed-- I checked
out the book about diabetes.
And it was a thick volume,
and on the first page,
it said the cure is
unknown and the reason is--
the cause is unknown.
And I thought, what
is then this book?
>>LISA: What's in
the rest of the book?
>>BOUTENKO: Yeah, if the
cause is unknown and the cure
is unknown, and it was
a very scary book that
told about losing the limbs
and the vision and kidneys.
And so I was thinking I
will do my own research
and do something.
And then I found the
book by Dr. Whitaker,
who said that diabetes could
be controlled by exercising.
Because exercise brings more
insulin into your system.
Muscles produce exercise.
And he said that if you take
out dairy and meat, then
you need less insulin.
And so I remember I bought
running shoes for my son
and for me.
Because I realized he
won't run without me.
And I said, from now on,
we're going to run every day.
>>LISA: Because he was young.
>>BOUTENKO: Yes.
And we started running,
and within a year,
we were running Bolder Boulder,
the 10K Bolder Boulder.
>>LISA: Oh my goodness.
>>BOUTENKO: It
was 1994, I think.
So you can find us
there on the list.
We all did it as a family.
So that was a good beginning.
And then I decided
to look for more.
And then I found raw food.
And so when I placed
him on raw food diet,
his blood sugar just
never went up again.
It was stabilized within
a matter of weeks.
>>LISA: Was it hard to do
coming from a Russian diet,
and then coming to the
Standard American Diet
and going into raw food?
Was that a challenging
transition to make?
>>BOUTENKO: Of course.
It was never easy.
It was difficult.
But the results were so fast to
show that I never looked back.
>>LISA: It stated the case
pretty rapidly, didn't it?
>>BOUTENKO: Yes.
It was very difficult,
especially the first day.
The first evening
was the hardest.
Because we were
just used to eating
the long Russian late supper.
And suddenly we just do nothing.
We have these bananas sitting
there that were green bananas.
I didn't know how to pick
good bananas at that time.
And the wax covered apples.
And we were hungry.
And we felt-- I
felt it was crazy.
What are we doing?
But I didn't see anything else.
And I'm into trying things.
And at night I heard somebody
walking in the kitchen opening
all the drawers
looking for food.
And I cleaned the
kitchen really well.
There was nothing.
>>LISA: You got
rid of everything.
The microwave, the
stove, everything.
>>BOUTENKO: Everything.
I turned the pilot off
and covered the heat
with a big cutting board.
>>LISA: The stove?
>>BOUTENKO: The stove.
And in the morning,
surprisingly, we
felt so much better.
My son told me, mom, my blood
sugar monitor is broken.
I said, why do you think so?
He said, because it
shows very low numbers.
And I said, honey, it
doesn't work that fast.
>>LISA: Even though
he was eating fruit?
>>BOUTENKO: Fruit doesn't
really do anything.
OK, later in our living on
raw food, we tested fruit.
Because I was curious, should
I give him fruit or not?
And I would give him raw honey,
cooked honey, processed honey,
raw fruit, and then just
anything else with the fruit.
And I figured out that
even for watermelon,
which is high glycemic index, if
I give him watermelon and test
his blood sugar, it will go
up for maybe 15, 20 minutes,
and then it goes below
what it was before.
So fruit doesn't really
cause high sugar permanently
in the blood.
It's not the cause of diabetes.
>>LISA: But those
sugar spikes are
what you're trying to avoid.
>>BOUTENKO: Yeah,
but they really
didn't affect him
in his disease.
He got used to eating fruit
and he could consume fruit.
He would eat mangoes
all the time.
>>LISA: But those
particular fruits
have more fiber in them, right?
>>BOUTENKO: Yes, yes.
So I don't think fruit
is bad for humans.
As long as it's
ripe and organic.
>>LISA: And balanced
with greens,
which we're going to learn
about in a little bit.
>>BOUTENKO: Yes, yes, yes, yes.
However, I don't want to just
rave about raw food diet,
because I tend to do
everything in extreme.
And I became fanatical
about being 100% raw.
And we've been raw
for 13 years, 100%.
And then we noticed that our
health is not really as perfect
as we felt I would say
first several years.
Something started to
show the deficiencies.
And I was very stubborn.
And I continued.
And I just would say,
oh, it's just detox.
Or it's something else.
I'm just tired.
I'm stressed.
And then I had to face it.
It's not the perfect
diet forever.
It did not work for us.
Maybe because we come
from cold climate.
I don't know what the reason.
But it did not work
all the way for us.
We started to have
brittle nails.
sensitivity in our teeth.
And I started to gain
weight, which was very, very
unfortunate for me
being a public speaker.
And I wanted to be healthy.
And I was believing I
was doing a good thing.
And then the very bad
cravings developed.
So something was going on.
And also the skin
became very dry.
And that's when I started
to do my research.
It's 2003, 2004.
I was thinking, how can
we find what can we eat?
And then I decided to
start from scratch.
I thought, who
would be the animal
that is the closest for humans?
If I find that animal, and
I go and see what they eat,
then I could figure
out, have an idea
what humans are supposed to eat.
>>LISA: You have a
interesting way of thinking.
>>BOUTENKO: And I was
thinking, it's not the pig.
I don't feel like we're
really close to pigs.
I don't feel like rats.
But then when I saw chimpanzees,
they share with humans
99.4% of the same
sequence of genes,
not just genes,
sequence of genes.
>>LISA: 99.4%.
>>BOUTENKO: Yes.
And then I thought, how lucky
I am that because Jane Goodall
has spent 30 years of her life
living in a tent in the jungle
right in the middle
and making research,
wrote volumes of information.
And I started reading
all her books,
developed huge respect
for these animals.
And actually, there
is a trend now.
They call them humans now.
>>LISA: Oh, really?
>>BOUTENKO: Not
animals, because they
have been proved
to be intelligent.
They can even learn
to talk sign language.
They do.
>>LISA: So they're very close.
They're very close
to the human being.
>>BOUTENKO: Yes,
they're very close.
And then I wanted to
see what they eat.
And when I saw what
they eat, I was really
shocked to see that half
of the diet is fruit.
I kind of knew that.
But that other 45% of
the diet is green leaves.
That was a shock to me.
I never knew that.
I thought it's a banana.
That's chimpanzee.
>>LISA: Right.
>>BOUTENKO: Yes.
And I went to many different
zoos, and I went to circuses.
And wherever I could find
a spot, the chimpanzee,
I would always go with a
big box of organic lettuce
and ask permission to
feed, to take pictures,
to communicate, to see.
And I observed how they would
just be so happy to eat greens.
>>LISA: You really are a
hands-on learner, aren't you?
>>BOUTENKO: Yes, yes.
I spent hours with some chimps
in circuses in other countries,
because in America
it's not allowed.
>>LISA: Right.
>>BOUTENKO: But I
wanted to know more.
And so I thought, logically, if
they are 99.4% similar to us,
our diet is supposed
to be 99% similar.
And then I made charts of human
diet, the typical human diet
and the chimpanzee diet.
And then I made the
typical raw fooder's diet.
And I saw that we
are so far gone.
We are 100% different.
>>LISA: Definitely.
>>BOUTENKO: And it
gave some ideas to me.
I saw that very
obviously that we're
missing the greens in our diet.
>>LISA: Well do
chimpanzees develop things
like cancer and diabetes?
>>BOUTENKO: Until
now they do not.
And the scientists were trying
to put AIDS into chimpanzees,
and they were trying to develop
in them, for example hepatitis
C, and they were unable
to, because chimps,
they have natural resistance
to these illnesses.
They cannot.
>>LISA: They cannot use
them for animal testing
because they're--
>>BOUTENKO: Unless they
put them on a human diet.
>>LISA: Mm.
Interesting.
That chart was very
interesting, because it
showed how much of the
Standard American Diet
is consumed with wheat and--
>>BOUTENKO: Processed foods.
>>LISA: Processed foods, yes.
Absolutely.
At what point did we get so
far away from the raw foods?
How did that happen in history?
>>BOUTENKO: Well, I was very
interested in that question.
And I've done lots of research.
Of course, there was not
enough scientific research
at that time.
And we could only
collect bits and pieces.
However, I was able to spot
the very first cookbook written
in English.
It belongs to the 13th century.
It was handwritten
cookbook by the chef
of a very rich
family in England.
So I was able to find this
book, and I looked through it.
And of course they ate all
kinds of meats and fish.
But every day they were
serving several-course dinners,
seven-course, six-course dinner.
And the first course
was always a huge salad,
huge salad consisting of
more than 20 wild edibles,
such as violet and
dandelions and chives, wild.
And they would just
tear them apart by hand
and sprinkle with
oil and some ripe
wine, which later
became vinegar.
And that was the first course.
They would just sit down
and eat, all of them.
And the interesting thing is
that people in the household,
including the servants,
horse man and the gardeners
and everybody, were only
allowed to participate
in the first course.
So that was their food.
>>LISA: That was what they
made the most nutrient rich,
if that was going to
be their only diet.
>>BOUTENKO: Yes,
and then the masters
of the-- the heads
of the family would
continue eating their
animal-rich or whatever,
desserts.
But the whole household, people
were eating this first course.
And that was their meal.
Of course, they
would go home and eat
something else,
probably some porridge.
But this was the
main food for them.
They were sustaining on that.
>>LISA: So they made it the
best that they could basically
make it.
>>BOUTENKO: Yeah. yeah.
>>LISA: Well, so it goes
back to how we have raw foods
and we've had raw foods in
our history for so long.
But what you specifically talk
about are the greens in foods.
>>BOUTENKO: Yes, greens.
And greens are the
only living thing
on the planet that could
transform sunshine into energy.
You and I cannot stand in the
sun and produce nutrients.
The greens can.
And through the
photosynthesis, the sunlight
turns into liquid
called chlorophyll.
So sunlight, you cannot touch.
The chlorophyll you can touch.
And then if I can take a minute
and explain how greens become
the most nutritious food on
the planet, I'll show you.
So this sunshine is energy.
It turns into carbohydrates.
Because the molecule
of chlorophyll
is the base of any
molecule of sugar,
whether it's date or
candy, or if it's honey,
it all originated from the
molecule of chlorophyll.
So then this sugar
goes into the apple
that grows on that
plant, or any fruit.
And half of it
goes into the root.
Roots are also very sweet.
Roots actually are
sweeter than the fruit.
That's why we make
our sugars out
of beet, yams, and
other root vegetables.
And so the different
microorganisms
are attracted to this
sweetness in roots.
And that's the purpose
of sweetness in roots,
to attract microorganisms
in the soil, multiply them.
And then they break down the
compost, break down the humus.
And they create micronutrients,
non-organic minerals.
>>LISA: In the soil?
>>BOUTENKO: Inorganic
calcium, inorganic potassium,
inorganic iron, inorganic.
And then the miracle happens.
When the plants begin
to suck those nutrients
in with the water using
osmotic pressure, it moves up.
As soon as this inorganic
nutrients reach the surface
and the sunshine touches
them, it flips over,
and chemistry becomes biology.
They become organic.
And so whatever is in
the plant is organic.
Whatever is in the
soil is inorganic.
You and I cannot eat soil.
>>LISA: Right.
But organic meaning that
they're nutrients and minerals.
>>BOUTENKO: They become
biological, have life.
They turn into live substance.
>>LISA: And it can
happen with wheat.
It could happen with fruit.
It can happen with greens.
That's the chemical
transition that happens.
>>BOUTENKO: It happens through
the stem into the greens.
And so this kale leaf is
approximately 45 days old.
And why do plants accumulate
all these nutrients?
Because for the future babies
of the plant, for the seeds.
The seeds is the
future of that plant.
So they want to accumulate
enough so then they
will give that into the seed.
And the green leaves are the
storage of that nutrition.
So at 45 days, it's
the perfect timing
to harvest all these nutrients.
Because if you wait longer,
there will be a flower.
And at that time,
the nutrients will
begin to move into the bloom.
>>LISA: The new flower.
>>BOUTENKO: And
then into the seeds.
And after the seeds
are happening,
then it will become
yellow, bitter, brown,
and it will become dry.
And it won't be
nutritious anymore.
>>LISA: How do you know
that that is 45 days old?
>>BOUTENKO: Approximately.
Because I'm a gardener.
>>LISA: Oh, that's the way it
looks when it's 45 days old.
>>BOUTENKO: Yeah.
>>LISA: That's amazing.
So that is one of the more
nutrient-dense green foods
on the planet is kale.
>>BOUTENKO: The most
nutritious food on the planet
are greens before blooming.
>>LISA: Greens before blooming.
>>BOUTENKO: Or if it's
something like dandelion that
blooms on and on
and on all summer,
that could be all summer long.
But you go for
younger leaves always.
>>LISA: It's interesting.
Earlier you'd said that the
carrot greens are actually
more nutritious than
the carrots themselves.
>>BOUTENKO: Yes.
Any greens are more
nutritious than any roots.
And for example, chimpanzees
don't consume roots
until it's a disaster, like a
drought or something else that
destroys--
>>LISA: There's
nothing else to eat.
>>BOUTENKO: Yes.
And so we humans
are eating roots
because we just-- of course,
it's better than French fries.
But roots have nutrition,
but greens have way more.
For example, the carrot
is rich in Vitamin A.
That's what we were told
by nutritionists at school.
>>LISA: Right
>>BOUTENKO: But the
carrot greens, according
to NutritionData.com, which
is official government site,
so the greens of carrot
have 192 times more Vitamin
A than the carrots.
>>LISA: Is that where
you get the information
on the nutrients of the
actual wild edibles?
>>BOUTENKO: Yeah, well,
this one of my main--
yes, yes, yes, yes.
Or the same with the beets.
Almost 200 times more
vitamin A in the greens
than in the beets.
>>LISA: Hm.
Now why do you-- and you are
the queen of green smoothies,
as we're going to see later on
with an amazing demonstration
of how to make these smoothies.
And really, it takes
visuals to see how easy
and how beautiful it is.
Why do you combine the
fruits and the vegetables
in the smoothies?
>>BOUTENKO: You know,
Lisa, in fact, I never
combine fruits and vegetables,
because it's a poor combining.
I only combine greens and fruit.
>>LISA: The distinction
is because vegetables
are more starchy.
>>BOUTENKO: You know
how the cow produces
dairy and cow produces meat?
We don't call meat dairy
or dairy called meat.
It comes from the same source,
but they are different.
So do the plants.
How different are these two?
And how different is
greens with the vegetable?
Vegetables have starch.
And if you combine
starch with the fruit,
it's a poor combination.
And it could cause problem.
>>LISA: Gastric problems
and inflammation.
>>BOUTENKO: Yes.
It could cause flatulence, gas.
My children used to
call it gas for less.
>>LISA: [LAUGHS]
So the nutrients
that are found in the
green leafy vegetables--
and we've heard this
many, many times--
are the most
nutrient-dense foods
that we can eat, with the
exception of maybe the camu
camu nut, and there's a
few other various things
you might find deep
into the rainforest.
But these are what's
readily available to us.
Now you have this
magic of putting these
into these beautiful
smoothies, which we actually
have a picture of.
You really make it so
aesthetic and pleasing
because of the natural
colors of all of the foods.
How do you find your protein
in this particular diet?
>>BOUTENKO: What does
the cow eat for protein?
Do farmers feed
the cows protein?
Or do they inject
protein into the cows?
What do cows a eat all the time?
Where do cows get protein?
>>LISA: Grass, wheat-- they
don't get protein, do they?
>>BOUTENKO: If you ever smell
the freshly milked milk,
then you will smell
the grassy smell.
It comes from the grass.
And that's what the
protein in cows get.
They say you need to
eat beef for protein.
Where does it come from?
It comes from greens.
And so greens is the
original source of protein.
And lately, I've been talking
to a lot of naturopaths,
and they say that many people
develop-- even children develop
kidney failure because of
over consumption of protein.
Because our kidneys can
only process so much
protein per day.
And our food is so loaded with
heavy, hard-to-process protein,
then the kidneys begin to fail.
And one of the
tests you could do
on that, if someone consumes
a little bit of beets,
and if urine becomes a pink
color, that means your kidneys
don't really process
the entire protein.
Your kidneys are already weak.
So when it comes from the
green from original source,
the body recognizes that.
It's something the
body's made for.
And so body could easily
figure out how much to take.
>>LISA: Doesn't
the body also need
protein for building
blocks for cellular repair?
>>BOUTENKO: Body needs
protein, of course.
And body gets lots of
protein from greens.
Greens have way more
protein that one can think.
For example, fruits have very
low protein, about like 6%.
But greens have up to
40% of protein content.
>>LISA: Is that again
found on the website
that you were mentioning?
>>BOUTENKO: Yes.
NutritionData.com.
>>LISA: I actually
have seen that protein
is found in broccoli,
in what other-- in kale?
Is protein found in kale?
>>BOUTENKO: Any greens
are very high in protein.
Romaine, red leaf lettuce
is very high in protein.
>>LISA: So they're very easily
assimilated, the protein is.
>>BOUTENKO: Yes,
because it comes
in a separated amino acids,
which is very easy for body
to process and
combine in the system.
Some animal sources
could have other things
in it, not protein, for example,
omega-3 fatty acids or B12
or vitamin D, that some
plants might not have.
But protein we don't
have to worry about.
There is plenty of
protein in greens.
>>LISA: What about amino acids?
>>BOUTENKO: Well amino
acids is protein.
>>LISA: Right, but that's
also found in the greens?
>>BOUTENKO: All nine
essential amino acids
are found in greens.
And I list them in my book,
and I even list how much,
and I compared it with chicken.
>>LISA: Yes, there's a
lot of great comparison
charts in the book.
That's terrific.
All right, so let's
talk about-- we
were talking about combining
the fruit and vegetables
and how if you-- you don't
do it with vegetables,
you combine fruit
with the greens.
Now, when you make
the smoothies that
are pretty high in the fruit,
aren't the calories pretty high
as well?
>>BOUTENKO: The calories are
not as high as in any processed
food.
You cannot really make a cup
of smoothie more than 300 grams
with just fruit-- more
than 300 calories.
>>LISA: Really?
>>BOUTENKO: You cannot really
create a cup of smoothie with
more than 300 calories in it.
Even if you put whatever fruits
you choose, even a coconut,
in it.
>>LISA: Really?
You can't get up to a
1,000-calorie smoothie if you
really try?
>>BOUTENKO: You have
to make a quart.
In the quart you can make
1,000, which will be four cups.
>>LISA: So in an 8-ounce glass,
really with the normal amount
of fruit, you can't get
much over 300 calories?
>>BOUTENKO: No, no.
>>LISA: So these
are some examples
of some of the beautiful
smoothies that you've done.
And I love in this
particular picture
how they don't all
blend together.
Because each one of the
mango, and there's an avocado
and a strawberry there--
they stay separated.
Why is that?
>>BOUTENKO: Because to
this particular smoothie,
I added psyllium husk powder.
>>LISA: Psyllium husk.
>>LISA: Psyllium husk powder,
and that turns it into pudding.
It solidifies.
It's a very good fiber.
It's healthy.
And then it stays
the same color.
And then I make one
pitcher of green.
And then I pour
it in little bit.
And then I make yellow
and then I put red.
>>LISA: And psyllium husk
comes from corn, right?
>>BOUTENKO: No, psyllium
husk is this husk
that grows on the
seed of plantain,
which is a wild edible.
>>LISA: Oh, OK.
I see.
And so that's what
causes the-- well, that's
the soluble fiber that
we need in our diets.
>>BOUTENKO: Yes.
>>LISA: That brings
me to a question.
Difference between
juicing and smoothies,
juicing and blending--
what's the difference there?
>>BOUTENKO: Well,
there could be a reason
to drink juice or a
smoothie in different times.
I find that smoothies,
first of all, they're
much more practical.
Because if you want
to juice, to you
have to be really
committed to that.
Because it takes
at least one hour,
including cleaning
and preparing.
>>LISA: It does take a while.
>>BOUTENKO: And it does
take a lot of waste.
It's way more expensive.
You have to put more things
to have a cup of juice.
And practically also you
have to drink it right away.
So if you want to drink
it three times a day
or four times a day, you have
to juice it four times a day.
And the smoothie, it takes three
minutes, including cleansing.
Tell me somebody
who cannot do it.
I have man doing it.
>>LISA: Takes a lot
longer to cook dinner.
>>BOUTENKO: Yes.
You will see in the food demo
how it's really so simple.
I have children, I went to
schools in Ashland, Oregon,
and I was demonstrating to
children in the Waldorf school
how to make smoothie.
And they were just
making smoothie.
They loved it.
And they were so
original with that.
They will just stick
their finger and try it,
and they say, wow,
this is even better.
>>LISA: It is very natural
just to throw a bunch of fruits
and blend it up.
It is a very easy
thing to do, easier.
Well, let's take a
look at this clip.
There's actually a clip that
your family put together--
15 smoothies in three minutes.
Take a look.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[END VIDEO PLAYBACK]
>>LISA: See all those
at RawFamily.com
You can see the
actual ingredients.
So simple and so easy to do.
Yes, kids can even do that.
That was your son in
the video, wasn't it?
>>BOUTENKO: Yes.
>>LISA: And he put fruits into
his smoothies, being diabetic.
>>BOUTENKO: While he
was in university,
he's been tested several
times for blood sugar.
And his pancreas works great.
He's completely recovered.
And I cannot even tell now
if he had Type I or Type II.
I don't know.
>>LISA: Amazing.
That's really amazing.
>>BOUTENKO: But I
met many more people
who reversed or decreased
insulin intake with diabetes
on just green smoothies.
>>LISA: Just green smoothies.
And they're easy enough for
kids to make, as we saw.
In this picture here, you
can see how kids are easy.
They put the food in, and
they put the fruit in,
and it's a lot of fun.
And they don't have
to cook anything.
So that's the good
part about it.
And it's actually even fun for--
well, not fun I should say,
but animals can also eat
green smoothies, right?
>>BOUTENKO: Oh, it's fun.
Yes, most animals, since
they try green smoothies--
if you have a dog, and
you make green smoothie
and share it with
the dog, the dog
will recognize when the
blender starts to make noise.
It will be right
there in the kitchen
waiting for its portion.
>>LISA: Really?
>>BOUTENKO: It will
lick everything
that will fall on them, yes.
>>LISA: That's definitely a
great difference from dog food.
Who knows what's in dog food?
And your dogs eat
green smoothies?
>>BOUTENKO: When we had dog,
our dog lived complete life,
and was very healthy
until the very last.
And she was eating
only raw food.
We gave her some raw
meat twice a week.
But she was eating oats
and pulp from the juicing.
And in the last years, she
got to drink some smoothies
in her last years.
Now we have a cat.
For the cat, we have to
prepare separate smoothie,
because cats cannot
have no fruit.
>>LISA: That is amazing.
You are a complete
raw food family.
So how did we get so
far away from this?
At what point did we get so
far away from eating like this?
>>BOUTENKO: I was very
curious about this.
And I found out the answer.
It was during the
Industrial Revolution,
which happened
about 108 years ago.
It just happened that everything
was invented at that time,
matches and mattresses
and showers,
many things-- sewing
machine, bicycles.
And English chemist invented
the process of refining sugar
108 years ago.
>>LISA: The sugar mill.
>>BOUTENKO: And suddenly
sugar became available.
Instead of apples that were
the sweetest thing people could
get, people started
to have confection.
Now, the scientists,
they found sugar
in the human tissue
of the brain.
And they made conclusion.
If there is sugar there, so
we need sugar for thinking.
And so they actually
blessed it, and they said,
you need sugar,
especially give it
to your children
and pregnant women.
Because we need it for thinking.
And people loved sugar.
And then a Swiss miller invented
metal grinder for his mill.
And instead of making the
very coarse, brown flour,
he was able to make
puffy, white flour.
And at that time, people
started to live in big cities,
and there was
hunger, starvation.
People were dying in the
winter time from starvation.
Imagine they were able to
make macaroni and spaghetti
from white flour, survival food.
You make it in harvest
time in September,
and then it could
stay for two years.
Even bugs don't eat it.
>>LISA: And it makes
plenty of food.
>>BOUTENKO: And
then you just boil
it and it gives you calories.
And you can survive till the
first greens in the forest.
And along with the white bread.
>>LISA: So in taking this
process of processing
the wheat, how
did it then become
what we know today as white
and bleached and refined?
>>BOUTENKO: We still have it.
And the third component was
when Napoleon the Great wanted
to conquer the
world 108 years ago,
and exactly he wanted
to conquer Russia,
he didn't know how
to feed the army.
That was the biggest problem.
So he announced a competition.
And a French chef came up
with the canning process.
The first canned food was
boiled for six hours nonstop
to kill all the bacteria in it.
This was his idea.
And then he would seal those
containers, glass or porcelain
containers, with
pitch, with a pitch.
>>LISA: Well, they
would weld it.
>>BOUTENKO: Yes.
No, they were
closed with a pitch.
>>LISA: OK.
>>BOUTENKO: OK, and
so this was the food
that the French army
had at Waterloo.
It worked.
It didn't spoil even
in the summer hot days.
And then English spies got this
secret, this military secret.
And the English were much
more economical and pragmatic.
And they said, well, six
hours is a lot of fuel.
It's very expensive.
The fuel was very
expensive at that time.
So they said, can we
possibly kill the bacteria
without boiling,
with some poison?
And then the opponents
said, but who
will eat the food
with the poison?
And they said, we don't
have to call it poison.
We could call it preservatives.
We'll give it a nice name.
>>LISA: And this is
how this all happened.
>>BOUTENKO: And this
is all how it started.
So they were able to
bring boiling time down
to 20 minutes.
And then they said ceramic
or glass is not economical.
It breaks very fast.
What can we find else?
They found the cheapest
possible metal, which was tin.
We use it until now.
To mask the taste
of preservatives,
they used lots of spices
and garlic and onion
in the preserves.
And this preserves, they
took over really big.
It was the most processed food.
And the doctors at that
time, they blessed it, too.
They said, well, this
is predigested food.
It is better than fresh.
You should eat it
even in the summer.
It is easy on your
digestive system,
especially give it to
children and pregnant women.
And so 108 years ago,
humans had the biggest,
the most magnificent
shift in the way humans
eat in human history.
And several years
later, humans developed
epidemics of four illnesses:
epidemics of scurvy,
epidemics of rickets,
vitamin D deficiency,
epidemics pellagra,
vitamin B deficiency,
and in the east
countries, very, very.
Pellagra in 1915 in the
United States alone,
10,000 people died
from pellagra.
It was a huge epidemic.
>>LISA: But before that,
though, there was plague,
there was famine, there
was other illnesses.
But it was because
of a lack of food.
>>BOUTENKO: They were not
based on lack of food.
They were with hygiene
and other reasons.
But these were
caused specifically--
scurvy was caused by lack
of vitamin C. By the way,
I looked up-- I
was curious to see
how did they treat
scurvy at that time?
And I put it in one of my books
that they were treating it
with mercury, sulfur,
purging, and bleeding.
That's how we were
treating scurvy.
And today, you know
how to treat scurvy.
You just eat some
fruits and vegetables.
>>LISA: Vitamin C.
>>BOUTENKO: And you
know what, Lisa?
I wouldn't be surprised if
another 20, 50, 100 years--
hopefully not-- pass
and we will be told,
you just need to be
more fruits and veggies
to cure breast cancer.
>>LISA: Well, that's what
we're being told now.
And there's so much evidence
around the 100% raw diet
going towards the healing of
various cancers and so forth.
But there's many, many
different protocols around that.
There's a lot of
different philosophies.
And that's a very
interesting story.
>>BOUTENKO: And you and I,
only the seventh generation
of people grown on
that processed food.
>>LISA: On cooked food.
>>BOUTENKO: On predominantly
processed foods.
And the interesting thing
is that at that time
also, the microscope was--
technology of microscope
was improving.
And Louis Pasteur made
his discovery at that time
unfortunately.
So doctors were sold out on
this bacteriological reason
for disease, and so
they did not connect
the predigested processed foods
with the illnesses, the scurvy
and rickets.
And so they told people
they need to take medicine.
Chemistry was developing.
So they started to prescribe
medicine to people.
And that, on top
of deficiencies,
it added toxicity.
And then we started to
have all this hypertension
and osteoporosis and
psoriasis and diabetes.
All of these
degenerative diseases
started to flourish and bloom.
And until now, they
grow in numbers.
>>LISA: Well, people now, if
they avoid the raw food diet,
they would avoid it because
they can't break down
the enzymes or the food as well.
Or they're afraid
of the bacteria
around the organic foods.
And there's all sorts
of different reasons
that people come
up with not to eat
a raw-- completely raw food.
And it not being convenient,
those types of things.
>>BOUTENKO: Convenience, yes.
Convenience and
108 years ago, it
was also considered
progressive way of eating.
And for the sake of fashion,
we would do anything.
Recently there was a fashion
to show underwear when you go.
And you do whatever if
you want to be considered
progressive and fashionable.
>>LISA: I see, yes.
Well, OK.
So now let's go back to
the way of eating here.
Do you ever recommend,
for convenience reasons,
having a green powder?
There's a lot of green
powdered supplements
available to make
it more convenient
yet still get the nutrients.
Do you ever do that?
>>LISA: I personally don't.
And the reason is
that I don't really
believe any packaged foods.
I'm very, very
skeptical about it.
Because there is a system
behind any producer.
And it's just so much easier
to put some preservative that
will keep the color green or
keep it from caulking together.
>>LISA: Most everything
that's packaged is.
Yeah.
>>BOUTENKO: I prefer to see
what I put into my blender.
And I see that this is an apple,
and I see that this is a green.
>>LISA: A whole, complete food.
>>BOUTENKO: Yeah, and
it's certified organic.
So I feel so much
more at peace when
I see what I put in my food.
So I don't like.
But I see what somebody really
is busy or traveling a lot,
maybe powders would
be the next thing.
>>LISA: Better than
cooked French fries.
>>BOUTENKO: Yes.
>>LISA: So I notice that
you put a lot of water
in your smoothies.
And we'll see that later
on in the demonstrations.
Does the water by any chance
dilute the effectiveness
of the enzymes in the raw foods?
>>BOUTENKO: That was one of
my concerns in the beginning.
However, I have conducted
15 green smoothie
week-long retreats in
the last few years.
And I have sensed that every
single person was refreshed,
nourished and the health
was improved tremendously.
I've seen people with
diabetes who would come.
Not that I asked them
to come with diabetes.
But they will say,
well I have diabetes.
I'm on pills or I'm on insulin.
Or people with heart problems
or people with cancer
will come to my retreats.
Psoriasis and tremor and
all kinds of problems,
incurable illnesses.
And then after one week, the
difference in them was so huge.
In Australia, there was a
woman who, after seven days,
her mother didn't recognize her.
Her mother came to meet her, to
pick her up and bring her home.
And she was standing,
and-- her daughter
was standing waiting for her
mother, and mother passed her.
She looked so different, so much
younger, so much more vibrant
that her mother
didn't recognize her.
>>LISA: And I know skin is
one of the biggest elimination
organs on the body.
So what you put in is directly
what comes out of the skin,
right?
So this does help for psoriasis?
Because that is a very,
very painful disease.
>>BOUTENKO: Yes, yes, yes.
And I've noticed that--
I receive so many emails
from people, about 80 per hour.
And they tell me their stories.
So one woman said that whenever
she would add flour or rice
to her diet, her
psoriasis comes back.
Whenever she takes it
out, it will go away.
>>LISA: Interesting.
You can actually
also make a paste out
of the foods themselves as well.
You could put-- I think I
read in one of your books
avocado, plantain, and
what was the other thing
that you can make
a paste out of?
>>BOUTENKO: There
could be plantain.
Dandelion.
>>LISA: And put it
directly on your skin?
You can just puree it in a--
>>BOUTENKO: Yes.
But I believe that our
body's fed from inside.
But of course yes.
Strawberries you could
put on your skin.
>>LISA: Well, I understand
that your food-- your son
is a huge wild edibles fan.
And he teaches how
to eat wild edibles
in the-- in our environment.
And they have to,
of course, be safe.
And they have to be--
But he teaches it.
There's an app
that he has, right?
>>BOUTENKO: Yes, yes.
Because my son had diabetes,
I told him, son, you
will have to find a
profession that you
will have to move a lot.
You have to either run four
miles every day forever
or you have to find
your expertise somewhere
where you could be moving.
So he's teaching dancing.
One of his expertise is
he's teaching salsa dancing.
And also he was taking guided
tours in the wilderness.
So that's why he became really
interested in the forest.
He loves forest.
And so he became so
really well knowledgeable
about wild edibles that often I
call him and ask him questions.
Like recently I found
something in my backyard,
and I don't know if
it's edible or not.
So I just called him and
I explained and showed him
on Skype.
And he said that's
for sure that--
>>LISA: Well, he modernized it
as well where he has an iPhone
app for green smoothies and for
a wild edibles where you can--
>>BOUTENKO: I made the
green smoothie app.
And he followed my steps
and made wild edible app.
>>LISA: That is
such a great idea.
The green smoothies
apps has-- you
can look at whatever you
have in your refrigerator.
>>BOUTENKO: Exactly.
Because people say,
how do I remember
all of that when I
go to the store, what
to put in the smoothie.
I don't have that
much experience.
So I thought, OK, you can
have it on your phone.
And it's available for any
kind of gadgets, iPhone or--
>>LISA: Android.
>>BOUTENKO: Android, yes.
And even on the web, it's free.
It's a web app also.
You can download anything.
>>LISA: So it's Green Smoothies.
>>BOUTENKO: Green
Smoothies, yes.
>>LISA: OK.
And so you could
choose any ingredient
that you have at home.
And you can see what
you can add to that
to make other smoothies.
You can find their nutritional
data and what it is good for,
that particular green or
fruit, what it is good for.
>>LISA: Oh, that's great.
>>BOUTENKO: Like which is
good for psoriasis, which
is good for osteoporosis,
which one is good.
>>LISA: And then
you get the recipe,
you get the nutritional
value, that's a great idea.
>>BOUTENKO: Yes, and
complete nutrition value,
like how many calories
and everything.
>>LISA: Well, we actually
have a clip of your son
making a smoothie
out of wild edibles.
>>BOUTENKO: Great.
>>LISA: Take a look.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
>>Purslane is one
of few plants that
are rich in omega-3 fatty acids.
It's high in Vitamin A, B6,
Vitamin C, minerals calcium,
iron, magnesium, phosphorus,
potassium, copper,
and manganese.
Purslane, as well
as lamb's quarters,
which is the next
slide, are two weeds
that plague organic farms.
And it has become
customary in my family
to seek out organic farmers
who have a purlsane and lamb's
quarters problem and
ask them if we might
be able to help them weed and
collect some of these weeds
for free so that we can
use them in smoothies.
You can also go on
to SeedsOfChange.com
and order wild edible
seeds-- SeadsOfChange.com.
If you don't want
any guesswork, you
can actually plant these
seeds in your garden
and grow wild edibles.
This is what we often
do in our garden.
All right, so this
is lamb's quarters.
And lamb's quarters really
likes dry, arid areas.
It likes to grow in the sun.
So chances are, if you have
a vacant lot or a ditch
around your neighborhood
or just a field,
you can find lamb's
quarters there.
It grows pretty big.
And its identifying
characteristic
is this white dust that
you see on the leaves.
And that white dust
is pure protein.
I never wash it off
because it's pure protein.
>>How tall is it?
>>It goes everywhere
from here to here.
It has a very stocky
stem, very fibrous.
It's kind of like wood almost.
I never really use
the stem because it's
a lot of insoluble fiber.
But it's got a very nice taste.
It kind of takes mild
like spinach, not too
much of a chlorophyll taste.
I just take the leaves
and I throw them
straight into a blender.
And it helps my body.
I love the taste of it.
High in calcium, niacin, folate,
iron, magnesium, phosphorus,
Vitamin A, C, K,
great source of fiber.
How about this one?
>>Clover.
How many people can
recognize clover?
Awesome.
So clovers are edible.
Let's see if you can
help me identify them.
How many leaves?
>>Three.
>>Three, unless
you're really lucky.
Then there's four.
Did you know that
four leaf clovers
are more nutritious
than three leaf clovers?
>>No.
>>Nah.
>>25% more.
[LAUGHTER]
>>Yeah.
There's one extra leaf.
[LAUGHTER]
So clovers are our
blood purifiers.
They help to cleanse
our blood and fight
cancer growths, any
kind of cysts or tumors.
You can eat the stem, the
flower, and the leaves.
[END VIDEO PLAYBACK]
>>LISA: That is amazing.
Victoria just said
during the break
that his diabetes
was a blessing.
That's amazing.
That's an incredible
thing to say.
Because look at the
path that he's taken
and how many people
that he has educated.
There are--
Actually, we're going
to take a-- we're going to do
a whole food demonstration.
We're going to
show you how to use
the wild dandelions
in a smoothie.
And Victoria's going
to go through each--
how to prepare them,
different nutritional value
of the different smoothies.
And I want you to take
note on how quickly
and how easily we can
whip up some incredibly
nutritious drinks.
So I think that's
a beautiful thing
that you said about
your son, too.
Thank you for
sharing that with us.
>>BOUTENKO: My pleasure.
>>LISA: Absolutely.
All right.
We'll be right back.
When we come back,
we're going to, again,
as I said, look at how
to make the smoothies.
We're going to learn more about
the green food revolution.
And we're going to
find out different ways
that you can easily and
conveniently support
your health.
We'll be right back.
>>LISA: Welcome back.
My guest is raw foodist
Victoria Boutenko.
And we're talking about how easy
it is to make green smoothies
and to add vitality and energy
and healing to your life.
And look at how
beautiful this is.
I mean, it really doesn't
get more colorful than this.
And this all comes from nature.
So let's make this really
super easy for people.
Tell us what we're doing.
We're making--
>>BOUTENKO: Sometimes I get
emails from people saying,
my green smoothies are so bad.
I just cannot drink them.
I just throw them in a compost.
And I cannot imagine making
a bad green smoothie.
It's so easy.
You need to take high quality,
preferably organic, greens
and high quality,
ripe, organic fruit.
>>LISA: OK.
>>BOUTENKO: And water and love.
And it will be good.
So today I'm going to
use variety of greens
and a variety of fruit
just to explain some.
>>LISA: So now once
again, the greens
counteract the glycemic
index of the fruit, right?
>>BOUTENKO: Yes.
The chlorophyll
and fiber in greens
slow down the absorption
of sugars in the fruit.
And it's totally safe
to consume for people
who have candida or diabetes
or any other sugar intolerance.
>>LISA: Really?
>>BOUTENKO: Yes, really.
>>LISA: Because really it
balances out perfectly.
>>BOUTENKO: Yes, absolutely.
So let's start with the chard.
And I have here rainbow
chard, which is so pretty.
>>LISA: So pretty.
>>BOUTENKO: And of
course this plant
is called in
Australia silver bead
and in Africa it's
called spinach.
But we're going to call it
by American name, chard.
So it's rainbow.
I'm going to cut the ends.
>>LISA: Oh, just look at that.
I just want to show that.
This is so beautiful.
OK, go ahead.
>>BOUTENKO: And I'm going to use
them for decoration in the end.
>>LISA: OK.
>>BOUTENKO: OK.
So now I'm going to ask
you, Lisa, to help me.
Because I like to remove the--
>>LISA: The stem.
>>BOUTENKO: The stem,
because it gives it
some kind of a peppery
flavor that I don't really
appreciate in the smoothie.
And we can use them
later somewhere.
So if you could just--
>>LISA: Specifically
with the chard
you want to remove the stem.
Chard and kale and
collard, those three.
>>LISA: OK.
>>BOUTENKO: The spinach I don't.
>>BOUTENKO: And I would
like to get this kale.
>>LISA: Yeah.
Now that's kale.
Kale is a beautiful-- leaves
on kale are very curly leaves.
>>BOUTENKO: Yeah.
There are different
kinds of kale,
but this is called curly kale.
And so what I'm going to do,
I'm just going to do this.
>>LISA: Oh, well that was easy.
All right.
>>BOUTENKO: Yes.
>>LISA: Back to chopping here.
Now kale has-- why
is so many people--
it seems to be the new
designer vegetable, kale.
Eat more kale.
I see so much of that.
What is in kale
that is so magical?
>>BOUTENKO: Kale has some
phytonutrients and antioxidants
that have been claimed to
cure and reverse cancer.
So it's pretty serious.
And I think also we intuitively
now cling to consume something,
we consider it pretty now.
And see how strong it is?
>>LISA: It is very strong.
And can you imagine, it's
made from liquefied sunlight?
We cannot touch sunlight.
>>LISA: Beautiful.
>>BOUTENKO: But we
can touch the greens.
>>LISA: That's interesting.
>>BOUTENKO: I want
to get all of it.
>>LISA: Yes.
Here's some more.
So kale, as you explained, is
there a reason for the texture
being more tough
than spinach texture?
>>BOUTENKO: Well, this is one
of the darkest green-- darkest
green green.
>>LISA: So the darker--
the bitter the better,
I've always heard.
>>BOUTENKO: The
darker, the better.
>>LISA: But the darker the
green, the more vitamins,
nutrients you're going to
find inside your vegetable?
>>BOUTENKO: Absolutely, yes.
>>LISA: That's just a
good rule of thumb anyway.
And sometimes people use green
cabbage or white cabbage.
And they say, is it OK to use
cabbage in green smoothie?
It's just not green enough.
No, absolutely.
>>LISA: Interesting.
>>BOUTENKO: It's good
for other things,
but not for the green smoothie.
>>LISA: Now, I've also
heard that when you blend it
in a high-speed speed blender,
it breaks down the consistency
so it's not as
difficult to digest.
Is that correct?
>>BOUTENKO: A high-speed blender
blends it and breaks down the--
>>LISA: Cellular level.
>>BOUTENKO: Cellular
level, yeah.
And so that ensures that all
your nutrients are completely
absorbed by the body.
>>LISA: So it's not
difficult to digest.
And this basically
does what, say,
cooking would do in terms
of breaking down the enzymes
so that they're more digestible
and assimilatable in the body.
>>BOUTENKO: Not necessarily
enzymes, but the nutrients.
>>LISA: The nutrients.
>>BOUTENKO: Because
greens have so much more--
for example beets is known
to have lots of calcium.
But beet greens have
six times more calcium
than the beet bulbs.
>>LISA: Oh. really?
>>BOUTENKO: So greens are high
in all nutrients, calcium,
potassium, sodium, zinc, copper.
You name it-- everything.
And so when you blend
them really well,
then you have abundance
all these nutrients.
You become healthy;
you become nourished.
>>LISA: What about
when people say
they can't digest
all of these greens.
Have you heard that before?
>>BOUTENKO: People cannot
digest all of these greens?
>>LISA: Yeah, they
say that they have
a problem digesting greens.
You've heard this before, right?
>>BOUTENKO: No.
>>LISA: No.
OK.
>>BOUTENKO: I have
never heard that.
>>BOUTENKO: No.
I've heard people have pain
when they have irritable bowel
syndrome.
>>LISA: Indgestion and so
forth from eating greens.
>>BOUTENKO: Well, we
can talk about this in--
>>LISA: So that's
definitely where
the greens tend
to be more cooked.
>>BOUTENKO: Yeah, I
would say 99.9% of people
can digest green smoothie.
Children love it, pets
love it, adults love it.
Anybody loves it.
>>LISA: That's great.
>>BOUTENKO: Green smoothies--
the proof is in the smoothie.
That's what I like to say.
>>LISA: So you also
make puddings, too.
So the reason you're
adding water here
is to liquefy it easier and
make it a little thinner?
>>BOUTENKO: Yeah.
We're going to make
abundant green smoothie
for the entire crew.
And this is good for anybody
making it for the family,
for the guests coming,
somebody calling you,
oh, we're around the corner.
We're going to visit you.
So this is thing to
make to please and meet
your guests with.
>>LISA: 10-minute dinner.
[BLENDER MOTOR]
>>BOUTENKO: Liquefied.
>>LISA: Wow, that's a lot.
>>BOUTENKO: Yes.
That's a lot of greens.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>BOUTENKO: And now we're
going to add lots of bananas.
>>LISA: OK.
>>BOUTENKO: But I first I'd
like to start with the mangoes.
Mango is my favorite fruit
to add to the smoothie.
It has to be ripe.
So it has to be soft,
but never to have
any brown or black spots.
>>LISA: OK.
>>BOUTENKO: It has to
always be no blemish.
>>LISA: Solid color.
>>BOUTENKO: Yes, solid color.
And so these are perfect
mangoes for that.
And they're organic.
So what I do, I just cut
it very close to the pit.
And then I take a spoon and
I scoop it out like this.
>>LISA: They tend to be very
high in fiber, don't they?
>>BOUTENKO: They
are a kind of fiber,
because they have both
soluble and insoluble fiber.
>>LISA: Now, I've cut into
an unripe mango before,
and they're very
difficult to cut.
So if this is-- did you
just see how easy it
was for Victoria
to cut this mango?
It's because it's very
ripe and softer in texture.
>>BOUTENKO: Nobody
should eat unripe fiber.
Yeah.
>>LISA: And explain why.
>>BOUTENKO: Because as the
mother breastfeeds the baby,
the longer the
baby is breastfed,
the healthier is the baby, the
more nourished is the baby.
So when the fruit stays on
the vine as long as possible,
preferably to the time
you take it and eat,
it is more nutritionally
valuable, much more nutrition.
It keeps getting
something from the tree.
>>LISA: So it gets more
nutritionally valuable
the riper it is.
>>BOUTENKO: Yes, yes.
>>LISA: OK.
All right, great.
And any particular
reason you chose mango?
>>BOUTENKO: Because
mango makes any smoothie
into perfect consistency.
It's the best.
>>LISA: It balances it out.
>>BOUTENKO: It's so full.
It has seven grams of
soluble fiber in it.
So it's perfect fix
for any green smoothie.
>>LISA: OK.
And you could also
peel the skin off
as well, which is
what I was doing.
>>BOUTENKO: If it's ripe.
>>LISA: If it's ripe.
OK.
Good to know.
All right.
And now, you're how many--
>>BOUTENKO: Now I'm
going to add bananas.
>>LISA: I'll stay
with the mangoes.
>>BOUTENKO: We'll keep adding
things in until it's full.
>>BOUTENKO: You really can't go
wrong in these types of things,
right?
>>BOUTENKO: No, you cannot.
>>LISA: You can add
as much or as little,
as long as it's
ripe and the right--
>>BOUTENKO: And then if
you taste it and in the end
you feel like something is
missing, it's not sweet enough,
you can always fix
it very easily.
And I'm going to
also add blueberries.
Blueberries are magic.
They have phytonutrients in
them that make people alkaline.
They reverse cancer.
And they heal-- are very
healing with diabetes.
They lower the blood sugar.
>>LISA: Even though they are
high in the glycemic index,
they lower blood sugar?
>>BOUTENKO: Yes, because
of their properties
of phytonutrients in them.
But don't do you ever
use only blueberries,
because that will make
a clumpy green smoothie.
There is something in
blueberries that make it clump.
>>LISA: Oh, really?
>>BOUTENKO: So I always use
a combination of bananas
and blueberries or
strawberries and blueberries.
>>LISA: These are the tips of
the trade that are interesting.
OK, we've got more
of the mango here.
>>BOUTENKO: And also
I like to use apples.
>>LISA: And what kind
of apples specifically?
>>BOUTENKO: Any apples.
These are--
>>LISA: Pink lady apples.
>>BOUTENKO: Pink ladies, yeah.
But I also like Fuji.
Any apples are good.
And I use seeds and
everything in it.
>>LISA: So you use the
core, the seeds, everything.
>>BOUTENKO: Everything.
I don't use that.
>>LISA: No stems.
>>BOUTENKO: It's just wood.
>>LISA: As longs as it's washed.
But I prefer organic,
because there's
a lot of statistics around it.
OK, so now we've
got chard, kale.
We've got blueberries.
We've got banana, apples.
[BLENDER MOTOR]
That looks good.
Look at the size of
these blueberries.
>>BOUTENKO: And apple.
[BLENDER MOTOR]
>>LISA: And a
little bit of water.
>>BOUTENKO: Do you feel like you
need to repeat the ingredients?
Do you want to repeat
the ingredients of this?
>>LISA: Sure.
>>BOUTENKO: And love.
>>LISA: Beautiful.
It's very, very nice.
I love this.
You can also put this
on your skin, right?
>>BOUTENKO: It's going to
be sticky, not like avocado.
>>LISA: So OK, so we had
the different chards.
We have kale, spinach,
blueberries, bananas, mangoes.
>>BOUTENKO: This is
a good consistency.
>>LISA: It's beautiful.
And the mango kind of what
binds it all together.
>>BOUTENKO: Yes.
And so it's a
beginner's smoothie.
So it's supposed to--
supposedly people
who never tried it
before, not only
it's supposed to be very tasty
and sweet, but-- what is this?
Oh, it's fine.
I thought it was a
piece of fruit there.
It's also supposed to
be very, very pretty.
And we eat with our yes.
Half of the flavor
comes from the beauty.
So I'm going to decorate it.
>>LISA: OK.
All right.
>>BOUTENKO: I'm
going to take this.
>>LISA: Because I
usually just want
to drink it because
it looks so good.
>>BOUTENKO: That's when you are
aware of the goodness in it.
>>LISA: But you really
do put a large emphasis
on decorating it and
making it beautiful.
Why do you do that?
>>BOUTENKO: Well, imagine
you make something green,
like this and put it
into the old coffee mug
says, Daddy loves you and
give it you your child.
At least you have to do--
>>LISA: Something aesthetically.
>>BOUTENKO: You
turn off the light
and do a shot in the
dark or something.
So they don't see it's green
and that it's not pretty.
So now we're going
to make it pretty.
>>LISA: OK
>>BOUTENKO: The
best thing to do is
to put something pretty,
some pretty green.
In this case, I
have oregano here.
Or you can use even the leaf
of the spinach like this.
So whatever you prefer.
>>LISA: Whatever you have.
>>BOUTENKO: Yeah.
And then I usually put
some fruit or some berry.
>>LISA: And look at
how thick that is.
Because the berry
doesn't even sink.
>>BOUTENKO: Yes.
And I also then use, because
it's called Rainbow Smoothie,
I'm going to use some rainbow
chard to decorate that.
>>LISA: OK.
And again, you can just--
>>BOUTENKO: Where's
the white one?
Oh, here is the white.
>>LISA: Yup, OK.
>>BOUTENKO: Oh, here it is.
I actually have it here.
>>LISA: This is what
I love about these,
is that this all is-- all
those different colors
represent different vitamins
in the vegetable, right,
in the greens?
>>BOUTENKO: So I'm just going
to put this a rainbow in there.
>>LISA: Oh, pretty.
Oh, that's a great technique.
>>BOUTENKO: Yes.
And then--
>>LISA: Great.
So this is something
that's really easy.
She just put all three of these
together, cut them together,
and on the knife they make this
beautiful, colorful display.
You can make green
foods so beautiful.
>>BOUTENKO: And
here, I will just,
for variety, I put the spinach.
>>LISA: And there you have it.
Now how easy was that?
A green food smoothie
for any beginner.
It took us under 10 minutes.
And it's probably going to
taste as beautiful as it looks.
>>BOUTENKO: And then
you meet your guest,
and say, I have something
special for you.
>>LISA: Cheers.
>>BOUTENKO: You don't
even say green smoothie.
Say something-- it's a dessert.
>>LISA: It is.
It is like a dessert, but it's
completely nutritious and not
as much sugar as most desserts.
Thank you.
Mm.
That is so good.
And you don't really
taste the greens at all.
>>BOUTENKO: Yeah.
>>LISA: The fruit have
the predominant taste.
>>BOUTENKO: The fruit dominates
the flavor and the taste.
Even though it's green,
it tastes like fruit.
>>LISA: Thank you so much.
All right.
Green smoothie for beginners.
>>BOUTENKO: Mm.
>>LISA: Mm.
This is so much fun.
OK, so now we're going to
make a coconut green eggnog.
Now this is something that
you can impress your guests
with during the holidays.
But I love coconut, anything
coconut is my favorite things.
What is the properties or
the value of a coconut?
What nutritional value
does a coconut bring?
>>BOUTENKO: Coconut water is
the cleanest water in the world.
It's distilled water,
distilled through the plant
through the palm tree.
And the coconut has
very good fat in it
that's very healthy fat.
>>LISA: Healthy fats.
And so it's purified water.
So you could basically drink
this instead of regular water.
But it has a lot of rich
enzymes in it, too, doesn't it?
>>BOUTENKO: It's
very rich in enzymes.
And there are some
information sources
that say that it's been given to
babies when the mother doesn't
have breast milk.
And they've been also
put intravenously.
>>LISA: Interesting, really?
>>BOUTENKO: Instead of blood.
So I don't know if it's true.
>>LISA: I don't know
if it has plasma.
All right.
So the challenge is how to
get into this beautiful--
>>BOUTENKO: It's live
water, that's for sure.
>>LISA: It's a live water.
OK, that's a good
way of saying it.
>>BOUTENKO: And also this
is the shaved coconut.
It has the husk removed from it.
Many people never saw
this kind of coconut.
They only saw the brown one.
The brown ones that
they sell in the store
usually are seven,
eight years old.
This is like two years old.
>>LISA: Oh my goodness.
>>BOUTENKO: So it's
a young coconut.
>>LISA: So look for the
ones in the market that
say young coconut.
You'll see that in the
tree, you see the brown.
Usually it's green.
>>BOUTENKO: Green.
And then when they shave
the green, it's brown.
And then under the
brown, there is this.
Well, actually the
brown is inside.
I'll show you.
>>LISA: OK.
>>BOUTENKO: The
green is removed.
The brown is still inside.
But it's because it's young,
it's going to be like yellow.
>>LISA: OK, all right.
>>BOUTENKO: OK, let's see.
>>LISA: So they can
be intimidating,
because people don't
how to get into them
without a sledgehammer.
So you've got a way you can get
into a coconut in two minutes
or less.
>>BOUTENKO: Yeah, remember
"Cast Away," yeah?
>>LISA: OK.
>>BOUTENKO: So first we're going
to remove from the pointy side
some of the husk,
the layer, until we
can see the inner husk, the one
that people usually see brown.
>>LISA: OK, I see.
And this is a lot
softer than I thought.
This is very soft.
It's not hard.
>>BOUTENKO: It's like a sponge.
>>LISA: Spongy, yeah, uh-huh.
>>BOUTENKO: I think
it protects it
from falling-- when it
falls, from cracking.
>>LISA: Now you can start to
see the center of the coconut,
if you can see the middle there.
>>BOUTENKO: So when the
coconut is very old,
like seven years old,
this falls apart.
And then people see that old
husk in there, the brown one.
And so when you open,
clear this much of this,
then you need to make a crack.
Because the coconut
has a structure
of circular structure.
And so if I put
the knife in here,
then it will crack open
circular, like a round,
like a circle.
So it looks dangerous,
but it's really not.
Because I'm pushing
with my arm and that.
>>LISA: OK.
Oh, it's very easy.
It went in very easily.
Oh, and there comes
the coconut juice.
>>BOUTENKO: And then
I just make it bigger.
And then I kind of twist it.
>>LISA: And the juice comes out.
Oh, you twist it.
So you kind of are
leveraging it a little bit.
>>BOUTENKO: Yeah.
>>LISA: OK.
Oh my gosh, it opened perfectly.
That's beautiful.
Just like a lid,
right like that.
Wow, that was really easy.
>>BOUTENKO: Yes.
So I'm going to pour
it in here so everybody
can see what it looks like.
>>LISA: I think that
was under a minute.
>>BOUTENKO: It's a very, very
good coconut, very healthy.
So the water is very clear.
>>LISA: Look at that.
>>BOUTENKO: If the
coconut is old,
then the water could be pink.
And then I usually discard that.
>>LISA: Because it's
got fungus in it.
>>BOUTENKO: Yes.
>>LISA: And then when you
said that the brown coconuts,
the older coconuts, those are
the ones that you definitely
don't want to drink, right?
>>BOUTENKO: No, you
don't want to drink them.
They usually are
without water already.
They just have the husk that's
very old and sometimes rancid.
>>LISA: So to know if the
coconut is good, you shake it,
and you shouldn't
hear the water, right?
>>BOUTENKO: You
shouldn't hear the water.
That means you
don't have any air.
>>LISA: OK, and
when the air comes,
that means that it's
fermented and creates--
so if you hear the water,
not a good coconut.
>>BOUTENKO: No.
So could start getting this--
>>LISA: Taking that out?
OK.
>>BOUTENKO: And actually,
I'll show you the trick.
It's very easy to do
it with the spatula.
You just stick the
spatula in between.
>>LISA: Oh my goodness,
that is so easy.
I don't know if any of you
have had the experience I've
had with coconuts, but
it's flown off the counter.
I've had sledge
hammers in the yard.
This is the easiest I've
ever seen a coconut open.
All right.
No, it's great.
Wow.
And the meat of the
coconut-- again,
you can do so much with it.
It's got all of the
vital nutrients, enzymes.
It is another very perfect food.
>>BOUTENKO: And so then
we just get it in there.
>>LISA: And this
is what is going
to give it that milky,
creamy consistency.
>>BOUTENKO: Eggnog.
>>LISA: The eggnog-like
consistency.
>>BOUTENKO: Of course we
want everything green.
This is a green age, so
we make eggnog green, too,
like "Green Eggs
and Ham," you know?
>>LISA: Well again,
the green is going
to counter balance the sugar
found in the coconut, right?
>>BOUTENKO: Yes, yes.
Yes.
>>LISA: OK.
That's beautiful.
Let me see that for a second.
I don't know if you
can see inside here,
but she cleaned it out, and it
came apart very, very nicely.
That's great.
>>BOUTENKO: So I'm going to
put this water back in here.
And then we're
going to do the same
with the second
one, second coconut.
>>LISA: OK.
Now this is a
two-coconut recipe.
>>BOUTENKO: Yes.
>>LISA: OK.
All right.
>>BOUTENKO: So again,
we find the pointy part.
You won't find any here, so.
And shave it.
>>LISA: OK.
All right.
And then again, this
part of the coconut
is something that
you won't find.
>>BOUTENKO: Keep your
fingers away from my knife.
>>LISA: OK, I'll keep my
fingers out of the way.
If you have young
children, make sure
that you're doing
this supervised.
The beautiful part about
the coconut inside,
this part right
here, you know when
you were talking about having
the brown fur on the outside
of the coconut, the kind
of hairy consistency?
>>BOUTENKO: That's what it is.
>>LISA: That's what that
usually-- but when it's older,
it's-- all right, shake it?
It's great.
>>BOUTENKO: Perfect.
>>LISA: Yeah, perfect.
>>BOUTENKO: You cannot hear
the water, so it's good.
And again, you just put a
very sharp knife in there
and hold it very tight.
This I hold tight.
You cannot really move it.
And--
>>LISA: OK.
And then it-- and
this part amazes me.
It just opens up,
pops off like a top.
>>BOUTENKO: Yeah.
>>LISA: Like a lid.
Great.
OK, I'll take the
meat out of that one.
>>BOUTENKO: Yeah.
It's really easy.
You could do it, even you do
it first time in your life.
>>LISA: OK.
I'll take the meat
out of this one
while you're working
on the dates.
OK.
I got it.
You taught me how.
OK, so now the next thing--
>>BOUTENKO: Keep going around.
>>LISA: OK, I'll keep on this.
So now the next thing is dates.
>>BOUTENKO: We're
going to add six dates.
We don't want pits in there.
Pits could break your blender.
And they will not blend.
>>LISA: They're very strong.
>>BOUTENKO: They're
very, very strong.
They're very protective.
So I just cut them along
and then open like this
and put the pit somewhere.
>>LISA: OK, OK.
>>BOUTENKO: Then throw
the date in there.
>>LISA: All right.
>>BOUTENKO: Make sure
you remove, although,
this little husk on it.
>>LISA: And the end as well.
Because it doesn't
blend very well.
>>BOUTENKO: No, it's very woody.
So I'm going to put six.
I have to have 6 pits out there.
>>LISA: All right.
And again, this is something
that you can use for a dessert.
You can use it for--
>>BOUTENKO: It is dessert.
>>LISA: It is dessert.
>>BOUTENKO: It is
a dessert, yeah.
It is a wonderful,
festive dessert.
>>LISA: Put this on a platter
with glasses of green coconut
smoothies.
It would just be beautiful.
>>BOUTENKO: And it's so tasty.
You'll have to put a sign on it,
don't drink it before dinner.
>>BOUTENKO: Yeah,
you'll be full, right?
>>BOUTENKO: Because
it will disappear.
Whenever I prepare one
for shows or anything,
I have to put the sign, because
it disappears from my fridge.
>>LISA: Because your
whole family eats it.
>>BOUTENKO: It's
just-- it's very tasty.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>BOUTENKO: OK, you done?
>>LISA: I am.
I'm done.
I didn't do as good
a job as you did.
>>BOUTENKO: Well,
after two coconuts,
you'll be much professional.
>>LISA: OK, I need a little
more experience there.
All right.
And then to-- now if
this isn't sweet enough,
we're going to add a
little bit of cinnamon
and a little bit of nutmeg.
>>BOUTENKO: We're going
to add bananas to it.
>>LISA: Oh, add bananas as well.
All right.
What's the difference
between these bananas here?
>>BOUTENKO: Well, I don't
want to use these ones.
Even though they look pretty.
Because I want the ripest.
As ripe as possible.
>>LISA: So even
the stem here shows
that it's not ripe
enough for you to use.
>>BOUTENKO: It's not ripe, no.
Just pull it over there.
>>LISA: OK.
All right.
But that's good to see.
Because it's really good
for people to understand.
Even though these have
a few blemishes on them,
that means that they're ripe,
and they're not too ripe,
though.
>>BOUTENKO: No, they're
not, because they're not
totally brown.
I think that when the-- from
my experience, when they ripe
correctly, when they're
picked up pretty ripe,
they will have dots.
If they've been
picked up very green,
they will instead
have black lines.
>>LISA: Oh, so if they've been
picked before they're ready,
they'll have the black lines.
>>BOUTENKO: They're always
picked for us in Oregon,
they always pick
before they're ready.
But when they have
dots, that means
they were not totally green.
They were somewhat
beginning to ripe.
>>LISA: Oh, OK.
OK.
>>BOUTENKO: You always choose
the ones with the dots.
>>LISA: With the dots on them.
>>BOUTENKO: Rather
than just blemishes.
>>LISA: And then
inside, does it matter
if they're bruised inside?
>>BOUTENKO: Well, if they're
really bruised and brown,
I cut this out.
>>LISA: You cut
the brown part out.
>>BOUTENKO: Yes.
>>LISA: OK.
That's beautiful.
And now, the reason
that you use the banana?
>>BOUTENKO: Just to make it
sweet, because it's eggnog.
>>LISA: Oh, it's already so
sweet with everything else
that you have.
It's beautiful.
>>BOUTENKO: Oh,
not for children.
>>LISA: No?
>>BOUTENKO: Children
like it sweet.
>>LISA: They like--
and the dates
make it very sweet as well.
Now why don't you
use date paste?
You used a full date?
>>BOUTENKO: I always like to
see what I put in my food.
>>LISA: You like the whole food.
>>BOUTENKO: I don't
trust anything
I buy in bottle or in
any other containers.
I like to see that
it's really a date.
>>LISA: And now the reason
you're taking the brown off
if just--
>>BOUTENKO: Because
it's been bruised.
>>LISA: OK
>>BOUTENKO: Which
is easy to take off.
But the rest of it is
white, it's creamy.
>>LISA: But is there anything
about this part of the banana
that's rotten?
>>BOUTENKO: It
could be fermented.
>>LISA: OK, it
And fermented is bad,
again, because it
has a certain amount
of toxins that it
produces when it gets fermented.
>>BOUTENKO: It's not deadly.
It's nothing like
aspirin or French fries.
But I wouldn't
consume it knowingly.
>>LISA: Now, do you
ever-- OK, let's do
the cinnamon and the nutmeg.
>>BOUTENKO: Can I
use your wiper here?
>>LISA: Definitely.
Now, do you ever
ferment your vegetables?
>>BOUTENKO: Oh, yes, absolutely.
I like sauerkraut and
fermented vegetables.
>>LISA: You make your
own cabbage and fermented
vegetables.
>>BOUTENKO: Yes, I love it.
>>LISA: So what's the
difference between fermenting
those vegetables and
the fermented fruits?
>>BOUTENKO: First of all,
fermented vegetables,
they ferment it with a
good, healthy bacteria that
thrives in the
presence of oxygen.
>>LISA: I see.
>>BOUTENKO: It's a good--
>>LISA: A certain culture.
>>BOUTENKO: It's called
aerobic bacteria.
And this fermented-- I
don't know how it fermented,
where it was, if
it's pathogenic,
or if it's just-- maybe I just
don't want fermented-- maybe
I'm going to eat
something that I don't
want to put fermented with it.
>>LISA: Right.
>>BOUTENKO: So it's not
supposed to be fermented.
>>LISA: OK, so now
cinnamon and nutmeg.
>>BOUTENKO: I will put it later.
>>LISA: Later, OK.
>>BOUTENKO: Yeah, first
I want to make sure
that my coconut will blend well.
And then I will add
everything else.
>>LISA: So coconut
water, the coconut meat.
We've got dates, bananas.
>>BOUTENKO: And not all bananas.
I just add them.
>>LISA: A couple of them.
>>BOUTENKO: Because
I want to make sure
that the coconut will blend.
Because coconut is not easy
to blend, to blend it well.
Because it's tough.
>>LISA: Once again,
high-speed blender.
[BLENDER MOTOR]
We need to add the dates.
Do we do that last?
>>BOUTENKO: And I will be adding
greens while it's working.
>>LISA: OK.
So you're going to add
it through the top?
This much?
More?
>>BOUTENKO: More.
>>LISA: A handful of greens.
And--
>>BOUTENKO: And now--
>>LISA: OK, so you can add that
in while you're-- cinnamon.
Pinch of nutmeg,
>>BOUTENKO: Yes.
>>LISA: Is that enough?
This gives it the eggnog--
>>BOUTENKO: A
little bit of love.
>>LISA: And love.
Made with love.
All things are better when
they're made with love.
>>BOUTENKO: There's been
a study made in Japan
when they took 100 people.
And they were making chocolate.
While making chocolate, 50
women were singing and praying.
And other 50 women were talked
to about some stressful things.
And so when people
were testing chocolate,
there was a 70%
accuracy of those
who were tested in saying
that this tastes better.
It was done from the
same ingredients.
Because the one that were
singing, it tasted better.
So it's a proven fact,
scientific research,
that you put love
in what you make.
>>LISA: Well, if our
frequency and vibration
is held within our words,
then that is absolutely true.
>>BOUTENKO: Yes,
and again, we're
going to decorate it nicely.
>>LISA: OK.
You're all about the decoration.
OK.
>>BOUTENKO: Yes.
We always want to make
everything pretty.
And you can decorate it with
anything you have on hand.
You have to be creative.
And you can create
it with anything.
It looks green, but you will
be surprised how it tastes.
>>LISA: Yes, it does.
>>BOUTENKO: It totally
doesn't taste like green.
>>LISA: But you've got all
of the vitamins and nutrients
in there from the greens.
>>BOUTENKO: Yeah.
And your children
could drink that,
and you don't have to push
them to eat broccoli, see?
>>LISA: It's a lot easier to
have a coconut green smoothie
than eating broccoli.
>>BOUTENKO: Yeah, eggnog.
So I'm going to slice some--
>>LISA: Mango?
>>BOUTENKO: --peeled mango.
And use slice of peeled
mango for decoration.
>>LISA: All right.
And the consistency of
this won't separate, right?
>>BOUTENKO: No,
because of the coconut.
>>LISA: And the coconut
holds it together?
>>BOUTENKO: Yes.
>>LISA: Just like
an avocado would?
>>BOUTENKO: And so I'm going
to make it like a flower.
>>LISA: Oh, that's beautiful.
Food art.
Now that's beautiful.
That's great.
>>BOUTENKO: And
just one more here.
>>LISA: It really
does make a difference
when you add the
decoration to it.
>>BOUTENKO: And it's easy.
And children could do that.
My grandchildren love to
decorate my smoothies.
I have four and seven-year-old,
two grandchildren.
And they decorate it.
And then I put this.
And then it looks like a flower.
>>LISA: Have a green
smoothie-making party
rather than a pizza-making
party or a cookie-making party.
>>BOUTENKO: Yes.
>>LISA: That is beautiful.
OK, we're adding in
our compostable straws.
And that is beautiful.
Absolutely.
Cheers.
>>BOUTENKO: It's possible you
have to eat it with a spoon.
It's possible.
Because it's kind of thick.
>>LISA: Oh.
Now, how would you
make this a pudding.
>>BOUTENKO: This is
actually a pudding.
>>LISA: It is a pudding.
All right.
>>BOUTENKO: Because
if I add more water,
then you can drink it.
>>LISA: OK.
>>BOUTENKO: Without
water, it's a pudding.
>>LISA: So you can make
it smoother or make it--
>>BOUTENKO: We both have
strong lungs, so we'll--
>>LISA: Cheers.
To your health.
Mm.
>>BOUTENKO: This is to live for.
>>LISA: That is amazing!
To live for, I love it.
That is amazing.
>>BOUTENKO: Any children around?
>>LISA: Oh, any-- yes.
Any child I guarantee you
would love, love this.
>>BOUTENKO: And it
doesn't green at all.
>>LISA: It doesn't
taste like green at all.
It's better than
chocolate, actually.
This is really, really
amazing, trust me.
>>BOUTENKO: Don't trust us.
Try it and you will
see how good it is.
>>LISA: Try it yourself.
All right.
This is the Coconut
Green Eggnog.
This next one
we're going to make
is a Rainbow Green Smoothie.
This again is going to be
the infusion between fruits
and your greens.
As opposed to fruits
and vegetables, which
tend to be more starchy,
these are, of course,
the green nutrients.
>>BOUTENKO: Yes, yes, that's it.
>>LISA: All right.
So how do we make this one?
>>BOUTENKO: We start with water.
So we see how much we add.
And I'm going to
add about two cups.
>>LISA: And the water
doesn't dilute the enzymes
from the fruits, right?
>>BOUTENKO: No.
>>LISA: OK.
>>BOUTENKO: Absolutely not.
>>LISA: It adds to the
consistency, right?
It makes it a little
bit more fluid.
>>BOUTENKO: Well, without
water, you cannot blend.
>>LISA: I've heard that, and
I tried it before with just
the fruit--
>>BOUTENKO: Or if you
have a high-speed blender,
you can use the plunger and
you do it without water.
And that will be a pudding.
>>LISA: More of a pudding, OK.
>>BOUTENKO: Yes.
This is more practical
because it's easy.
It's fast.
You can do it on the way to
work and at home in the morning.
>>LISA: And you can drink it.
>>BOUTENKO: It takes under three
minutes, including cleaning.
>>LISA: Wow.
And now, OK, starting
off with strawberries.
This is good for summer.
>>BOUTENKO: Yeah.
Yes, summer and also some
people like it slightly chilled.
>>LISA: OK.
All right, it will be kind
of acting as your ice.
Now, after you do-- you
make a smoothie like this,
how long does it
last, the smoothie?
>>BOUTENKO: The
smoothie will last up
to three days in the fridge.
And it will still be green.
Of course, fresh is better.
>>LISA: And it's-- that's--
having the green in it makes it
last longer than if
it was just fruit?
>>BOUTENKO: Not necessarily
the green, the fiber.
The insoluble fiber
prevents it from spoiling.
Because the fiber has all
the antioxidants in it.
But for example
when you make juice,
it becomes brown instantly.
You have to drink it right away.
>>LISA: Right.
>>BOUTENKO: It becomes
brown and bitter.
But when you make smoothie, it
stays brilliant green color,
or the same color
what you make it.
>>LISA: Because of the
fiber in the leaves?
>>BOUTENKO: Because
of the fiber in it.
>>LISA: OK, I see.
>>BOUTENKO: The antioxidants
are in the fiber.
>>LISA: And they kind of
work as a preservative.
>>BOUTENKO: Yes, antioxidants.
Yes.
>>BOUTENKO: OK.
Perfect.
If you throw the fiber in
the-- the pulp in the compost,
then you have just
juice unprotected.
>>LISA: Mm.
That makes a lot more sense.
OK, so--
>>BOUTENKO: So that's why you
can make for the whole day.
I like that these
leaves are big,
and that's why I put in
the recipe only two leaves.
Because they're huge.
This one leaf is like
many leaves of spinach.
>>LISA: And then this
is a rainbow chard.
And you say we should not have
the stems in this partic--
when you use rainbow chard.
>>BOUTENKO: When I use the
chard or collard or kale,
I remove stems.
And I put them later in
something else, in a salad.
Because they're not green.
They don't provide chlorophyll.
And they give peppery taste
that is not very nice.
>>LISA: OK, do you
want yellow or white?
>>BOUTENKO: I want yellow, too.
>>LISA: Yellow also, OK.
>>BOUTENKO: Yeah.
>>LISA: You don't have
to necessarily cut it.
You could just tear
the leaves off, right?
>>BOUTENKO: You can, yes.
>>LISA: OK.
>>BOUTENKO: It's just faster.
>>LISA: If you were to put
this type of thing in water,
would it turn the water red?
>>BOUTENKO: Pink, yes.
>>LISA: A pinkish color?
>>BOUTENKO: Yes.
>>LISA: Or yellow?
>>LISA: That's really neat.
OK, great.
>>BOUTENKO: That's how
ancient Greeks used
to make their green
smoothie without blender.
They would cut the
green leaves, and they
would put them in water
and let it sit for an hour.
And then there will be
green-- slightly green water,
and then they'll drink it.
>>LISA: Oh, wow.
So it really takes
it-- that's great.
>>BOUTENKO: OK, so
we're going to--
and I will add
these bananas, too.
>>LISA: OK.
It's interesting, because this
has, of course, been around
since the beginning of time.
And we've gotten so far away
from these types of foods.
But it is so easy
to make something
that is so completely filling.
After something like
this, you're not hungry.
>>BOUTENKO: Yeah, my
four-year-old Lilly,
granddaughter, she
always peels the banana.
This is her work.
>>LISA: This is her work.
>>BOUTENKO: In our family,
she peels the bananas.
>>LISA: OK, so the
bananas, again, and I've
mentioned this several
times, but the greens
counteract the sugars,
the high sugars.
So these are OK for diabetics.
>>BOUTENKO: Yes, yes.
And especially for
diabetics, because my son
was diagnosed with
diabetes when he was 9.
He doesn't have
diabetes anymore.
He loved, intuitively
loved, mangoes.
He could eat mangoes
all the time.
And then I learned
from Dr, Bernard Jensen
that mangoes have properties in
them that actually good for--
to restore the pancreas.
And I know that you can
use a peel in mango,
but mango comes from
the poison oak family.
>>LISA: It does?
>>BOUTENKO: It does.
And especially in
the spring and fall
when the season of allergies,
I prefer to peel it,
just because it accumulates.
Once in a while, I put
peel when it's organic,
but in most cases, I peel this.
So the skin has vitamins
in it as well, but--
>>BOUTENKO: Yes.
>>LISA: This would be
good for decoration.
>>BOUTENKO: Some allergenic.
>>LISA: I'm learning now.
This is a great
decoration for later.
We can wrap it around the glass.
You're teaching me well.
>>BOUTENKO: Thank you.
>>LISA: There's so
much that you can
do with just these
simple things.
And this is something
that, again, you
don't have to-- don't throw it
in the trash, compost this so
that it can become
an organic substance.
>>BOUTENKO: It's a sin to
throw organic in the plastic.
And it's very good to teach
children under the age of 6
to peel fruit,
apples and mangoes.
>>LISA: Teach them, meaning
the technique of it?
>>BOUTENKO: With a knife,
because if they don't learn it
under the six, they will
be always kind of hard.
>>LISA: Scared of it.
>>BOUTENKO: Scared of it.
>>LISA: And is this
the way to do it?
You move towards your thumb?
>>BOUTENKO: Yes.
>>LISA: OK.
>>BOUTENKO: And it's safe.
>>LISA: Also you can take and
do this type of action when
you're teaching young children
so that they're moving away
from--
>>BOUTENKO: Well, this kind
of gives us peace of mind.
But it doesn't
really teach them.
>>LISA: It doesn't, really?
That's what I was
always taught, really.
>>BOUTENKO: That's why we
have so many people who
don't know how to
peel the apple.
>>LISA: Because we're all
being taught like this?
>>BOUTENKO: Yes.
I ask people at
this marketplace,
why don't they buy mangoes?
They say because we don't
know how to peel it.
That's the answer.
>>LISA: And it does
make a big difference
when they're ripe like this,
because it's a lot easier
to move.
>>BOUTENKO: Then you
can scoop it out.
But it's a good habit to
know for healthy living.
>>LISA: This is like the
consistency of an avocado.
Yeah, this is.
I mean what's in there.
>>BOUTENKO: Yeah,
because it's ripe.
>>LISA: Mhm.
Look at how pretty that is.
[BLENDER MOTOR]
OK.
This is a Rainbow
Green Smoothie.
Lots of energy comes from this.
Now, where do you-- I'll
wait till you're done here.
Is that it?
That's all that goes in this?
>>BOUTENKO: That's all.
>>LISA: That's it.
>>BOUTENKO: That's it.
>>LISA: Now, what
gives you the energy?
Is it the sugar in the fruits?
Or is it the--
>>BOUTENKO: The energy
you get both from ripe,
organic fruit and from--
>>LISA: The vitality
from the greens.
>>BOUTENKO: From chlorophyll.
Because chlorophyll
is liquefied sunshine.
And sunlight is the
source of-- main source
of energy on planet.
All carbohydrates
actually come from sun
through the photosynthesis.
Because the molecule
of chlorophyll
is the base of any
molecule of sugar.
>>LISA: So now,
when you add fruits
that have more
sugar in them, does
that make a difference
in the smoothie?
Do you add more
greens when you have
fruits that are higher in sugar?
>>BOUTENKO: Yes.
When it's sweeter fruit, I
could put more greens in it.
I would-- usually
for the beginners,
I use 60% fruit, 40%
greens volume-wise.
>>LISA: OK.
>>BOUTENKO: But
eventually, everybody
ends up having 70%
greens and 30% fruit.
Because eventually their
blood sugar goes down,
and they crave
greener smoothies.
>>LISA: So you don't
crave as much sugar.
>>BOUTENKO: Yeah, but
if you've been drinking
smoothies for a
year, and you would
want to prepare your favorite
smoothie to the beginner
or to the child, they will
be completely turned off.
You don't want that to happen.
>>LISA: To have
more of the greens.
>>BOUTENKO: So you knowingly
and consciously put more fruit
to please them.
>>LISA: But they're turned off
because their pallet had been
otherwise conditioned with--
>>BOUTENKO: But if
it's like that eggnog
we made or like this one,
this is very, very delicious.
>>LISA: Very good.
>>BOUTENKO: Everybody
would like this.
>>LISA: So now, do
these tend to be--
and especially
the eggnog one, do
they tend to be
higher in calories?
>>BOUTENKO: Little bit.
But nothing to compare
with French fries or pizza.
>>LISA: Right.
>>BOUTENKO: Like
a slice of pizza
has almost 1,500 calories in it.
And that whole quart
of smoothie of eggnog
would be 300 calories.
>>LISA: 300?
Oh, I would think a glass
would have 300 calories.
It tastes so good.
>>BOUTENKO: Well, you could
make a glass to be 300.
But never like 1,000.
>>LISA: Wow, that's interesting.
I mean, there's
salads in restaurants
that are 1,000 calories,
1,700 calories in a salad.
>>BOUTENKO: Yes.
There is no worry about
calories in smoothies.
So we have to do what now?
>>LISA: Decorate!
>>BOUTENKO: Decorate.
>>LISA: Decorate it.
>>BOUTENKO: So I have sliced
some of the strawberries here.
>>LISA: OK.
And again, the
consistency is so thick.
It all just kind of
floats on the top.
>>BOUTENKO: And I don't
know what I'm going to do.
I'm just kind of
playing with that.
Why don't I use an apple.
>>LISA: OK.
Go ahead.
>>BOUTENKO: I just
like the red apple.
>>LISA: OK.
I'll help.
Look, I'm starting
to get creative now.
>>BOUTENKO: Good.
>>LISA: There we go.
Like you did earlier.
Oh, I just sunk the strawberry.
That's OK.
>>BOUTENKO: That's OK.
>>LISA: There we go.
>>BOUTENKO: So I think maybe we
could do something like that.
>>LISA: Yours probably
looks better than mine.
Hey, this is fun.
I mean, you really
can experiment.
Or you could go like
this, just like it
was a-- is that all right?
>>BOUTENKO: Absolutely.
Anything is all right.
And when children participate,
then they cannot say that
it's not tasty, because
it's part of them.
>>LISA: So you really can't go
wrong with something like this.
>>BOUTENKO: No, no, no.
>>LISA: You don't have to
follow an exact recipe,
because I'm not a
huge recipe follower.
For those that are, they
can follow the recipe
and be just fine.
>>BOUTENKO: And you can make
it like more three dimensional.
>>LISA: OK.
That is beautiful.
That is art right
there, art in a glass.
Art and health in a glass.
Absolutely beautiful.
Cheers to your health.
Thank you so much for watching.
I hope you learned a lot.
I learned so much, that you can
really make health in a glass
in under five minutes and
in a very, very easy way.
So if you'd like to watch more
of the replay of my interview
with Victoria
Boutenko, or if you
want to share it
with your friends,
you can go to GaiamTV.com,
and you can find a lot more
thought provoking
interviews there
and inspirational
films and so much more.
Go to GaiamTV.com.
Sign up for your free
trial membership today.
And until next time, I
invite you to stay healthy.
>>BOUTENKO: Cheers.
Greens.
>>LISA: Cheers.
Cheers to greens.
Greens for life.
[MUSIC PLAYING]